# Climate Claims: Finding the facts in a "post-truth" world
## Evaluation of Roy Spencer's Article on the Validity of Anthropogenic Gobal Warming 
#### Ravi Verma 
#### October 24, 2021

Roy Spencer’s blog post titled *Global Warming: Natural or Manmade?* provides ideas on why scientists subscribe to anthropogenic global warming and why those reasons are faulty (Spencer, n.d.a). Roy Spencer is of particular interest as he has many titles including a Ph.D. in meteorology and a former climate scientist at NASA (Spencer, n.d.b). It is commendable that his research was never funded by private oil companies and instead entirely supported by government agencies including NASA  (Spencer, n.d.b).   

What makes Roy’s arguments compelling is that he does not dismiss findings used to support the scientific consensus on global warming. His scientific background comes through as he attempts to devalue opposing evidence with analysis. Roy says that many scientists believe global warming is human-made because burning fossil fuels releases CO<sub>2</sub>, a greenhouse gas. While he acknowledges that after the industrial revolution, CO<sub>2</sub> in the atmosphere increased by 40-45%, he argues that the change in proportion of CO<sub>2</sub> in the atmosphere is not significant. Specifically, he cites that in 2008, 39/100,000 molecules are CO<sub>2</sub> and it would take five years to increase that to 40/100,000. What Roy fails to comment on is *why* these values are not significant. While using ratios like that may make increases in CO<sub>2</sub> composition seem insignificant, is it really? He does not comment on the potency of CO<sub>2</sub> as a greenhouse gas relative to other atmospheric molecules. One SkepticalScience blog post, which is considered an authoritative source, the likes of NASA and IPCC, acknowledges the relatively high warming potential of CO<sub>2</sub> using spectroscopy (Wayne, 2015a). While Roy’s post flows well as it shifts focus to discussing climate sensitivity, the specific values of CO<sub>2</sub> are not explained later. 

Roy makes the compelling argument that there has been little research funding for determining mechanisms for natural causes of global warming. On the topic of climate sensitivity, which is how much global temperatures rise from increases in CO<sub>2</sub> concentration, he argues that we do not have a strong understanding of it, and the consensus that climate sensitivity is high does not consider factors like how clouds respond to warming and how that would affect the amount of radiation Earth absorbs. While Roy says we do not have strong evidence of climate sensitivity, he goes on to say that satellite evidence supports that climate sensitivity is actually low, but fails to elaborate further. While it may be true that our understanding of changes in climate sensitivity is poor, ice cores provide data which consistently demonstrate there is high sensitivity to increased greenhouse gasses (Wayne, 2015b). Still, there is no harm in researching how clouds would reach to increase in CO<sub>2</sub> so Roy’s research avenue should be supported. 

Roy’s academic titles, writing style, and methodology of dismantling the scientific consensus paints him as a credible source— and he may be. As he cites data in his arguments and *mostly* refrains from baselessly using strong words like “definitely”, the accuracy of most ideas is not low. What is problematic is the poor logical validity and plausibility of his arguments. Additionally, just because you believe the support for anthropogenic climate change is weak, it should not mean that the alternative, that most of global warming is natural, should be taken as fact. Additionally, Roy’s commentary of the implication of his alternative viewpoint is missing. Does he wish to prevent actions aiming to mitigate global warming, calm public hysteria, or something else? Overall, despite the strong unsupported claim on global warming being mostly natural, Roy’s blog is professional, and provides opportunities for respectful discourse.

## Works Cited


Spencer, R., n.d.b About Roy Spencer. [Blog] Roy Spencer Global Warming. Available at: <http://www.drroyspencer.com/about/>.

Spencer, R., n.d.a Global Warming: Natural or Manmade. [Blog] Roy Spencer Global Warming. Available at: <http://www.drroyspencer.com/global-warming-natural-or-manmade/>.

Wayne , G.P., 2015b. How sensitive is our climate? [online] Skeptical Science. Available at: <https://skepticalscience.com/climate-sensitivity.htm>.

Wayne, G.P., 2015a. How do we know more CO2 is causing warming? [online] Skeptical Science. Available at: <https://skepticalscience.com/empirical-evidence-for-co2-enhanced-greenhouse-effect.htm>.
